UDPipe API Reference
====================

The UDPipe API is defined in header ``udpipe.h`` and resides in
``ufal::udpipe`` namespace. The API allows only using existing models,
for custom model creation you have to use the ``train_parser`` binary.

The strings used in the UDPipe API are always UTF-8 encoded (except from
file paths, whose encoding is system dependent).


== UDPipe Versioning ==[versioning]

UDPipe is versioned using [Semantic Versioning http://semver.org/].
Therefore, a version consists of three numbers //major.minor.patch//, optionally
followed by a hyphen and pre-release version info, with the following semantics:

- Stable versions have no pre-release version info, development have non-empty
  pre-release version info.
- Two versions with the same //major.minor// have the same API with the same
  behaviour, apart from bugs. Therefore, if only //patch// is increased, the
  new version is only a bug-fix release.
- If two versions //v// and //u// have the same //major//, but //minor(v)// is
  greater than //minor(u)//, version //v// contains only additions to the API.
  In other words, the API of //u// is all present in //v// with the same
  behaviour (once again apart from bugs). It is therefore safe to upgrade to
  a newer UDPipe version with the same //major//.
- If two versions differ in //major//, their API may differ in any way.


Models created by UDPipe have the same behaviour in all UDPipe
versions with same //major//, apart from obvious bugfixes. On the other hand,
models created from the same data by different //major.minor// UDPipe
versions may have different behaviour.

== Struct string_piece ==[string_piece]
```
struct string_piece {
  const char* str;
  size_t len;

  string_piece();
  string_piece(const char* str);
  string_piece(const char* str, size_t len);
  string_piece(const std::string& str);
}
```

The [``string_piece`` #string_piece] is used for efficient string passing. The string
referenced in [``string_piece`` #string_piece] is not owned by it, so users have to make sure
the referenced string exists as long as the [``string_piece`` #string_piece].

== Class token ==[token]
```
class token {
 public:
  string form;
  string misc;

  token([string_piece #string_piece] form = string_piece(), [string_piece #string_piece] misc = string_piece());

  // CoNLL-U defined SpaceAfter=No feature
  bool [get_space_after #token_get_space_after]() const;
  void [set_space_after #token_set_space_after](bool space_after);

  // UDPipe-specific all-spaces-preserving SpacesBefore and SpacesAfter features
  void [get_spaces_before #token_get_spaces_before](string& spaces_before) const;
  void [set_spaces_before #token_set_spaces_before]([string_piece #string_piece] spaces_before);
  void [get_spaces_after #token_get_spaces_after](string& spaces_after) const;
  void [set_spaces_after #token_set_spaces_after]([string_piece #string_piece] spaces_after);
  void [get_spaces_in_token #token_get_spaces_in_token](string& spaces_in_token) const;
  void [set_spaces_in_token #token_set_spaces_in_token]([string_piece #string_piece] spaces_in_token);

  // UDPipe-specific TokenRange feature
  bool [get_token_range #token_get_token_range](size_t& start, size_t& end) const;
  void [set_token_range #token_set_token_range](size_t start, size_t end);
};
```

The [``token`` #token] class represents a sentence token,
with ``form`` and ``misc`` fields corresponding to [CoNLL-U fields http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html].
The [``token`` #token] class acts mostly as a parent to [``word`` #word]
and [``multiword_token`` #multiword_token] classes.

The class also offers several methods for manipulating features in the ``misc`` field.
Notably, UDPipe uses custom ``misc`` fields to store all spaces in the original
document. This markup is backward compatible with CoNLL-U v2 ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature.
This markup can be utilized by ``plaintext`` output format, which allows reconstructing
the original document.

The markup uses the following ``misc`` fields:
- ``SpacesBefore=content`` (by default empty): spaces/other content preceding the token
- ``SpacesAfter=content`` (by default a space if ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature is not present, empty otherwise):
  spaces/other content following the token
- ``SpacesInToken=content`` (by default equal to the FORM of the token): FORM of the token
  including original spaces (this is needed only if tokens are allowed to contain spaces and
  a token contains a tab or newline characters)
-

The ``content`` of all above three fields must be escaped to allow storing tabs and newlines.
The following C-like schema is used:
- ``\s``: space
- ``\t``: tab
- ``\r``: CR character
- ``\n``: LF character
- ``\p``: | (pipe character)
- ``\\``: \ (backslash character)
-


=== token::get_space_after() ===[token_get_space_after]
``` bool get_space_after() const;

Returns ``true`` if the token should be followed by a spaces, ``false`` if not,
according to the absence or presence of the ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature in the ``misc`` field.


=== token::set_space_after() ===[token_set_space_after]
``` void set_space_after(bool space_after);

Adds or removes the ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature in the ``misc`` field.


=== token::get_spaces_before() ===[token_get_spaces_before]
``` void get_spaces_before(string& spaces_before) const;

Return spaces preceding current token, stored in the ``SpacesBefore``
feature in the ``misc`` field. If ``SpacesBefore`` is not present, empty string
is returned.


=== token::set_spaces_before() ===[token_set_spaces_before]
``` void set_spaces_before([string_piece #string_piece] spaces_before);

Set the ``SpacesBefore`` feature in the ``misc`` field.


=== token::get_spaces_after() ===[token_get_spaces_after]
``` void get_spaces_after(string& spaces_after) const;

Return spaces after current token, stored in the ``SpacesAfter``
feature in the ``misc`` field.

If ``SpacesAfter`` is not present and ``SpaceAfter=No`` is present,
return an empty string; if neither feature is present, one space is returned.


=== token::set_spaces_after() ===[token_set_spaces_after]
``` void set_spaces_after([string_piece #string_piece] spaces_after);

Set the ``SpacesAfter`` and ``SpaceAfter=No`` features in the ``misc`` field.


=== token::get_spaces_in_token() ===[token_get_spaces_in_token]
``` void get_spaces_in_token(string& spaces_in_token) const;

Return the value of the ``SpacesInToken`` feature, if present.
Otherwise, empty string is returned.


=== token::set_spaces_in_token() ===[token_set_spaces_in_token]
``` void set_spaces_in_token([string_piece #string_piece] spaces_in_token);

Set the ``SpacesInToken`` feature in the ``misc`` field.


=== token::get_token_range() ===[token_get_token_range]
``` bool get_token_range(size_t& start, size_t& end) const;

If present, return the value of the ``TokenRange`` feature in the ``misc`` field.
The format of the feature (inspired by Python) is ``TokenRange=start:end``,
where ``start`` is zero-based document-level index of the start of the token
(counted in Unicode characters) and ``end`` is zero-based document-level index
of the first character following the token (i.e., the length of the token is ``end-start``).


=== token::set_token_range() ===[token_set_token_range]
``` void set_token_range(size_t start, size_t end);

Set the ``TokenRange`` feature in the ``misc`` field. If ``string::npos``
is passed in the ``start`` argument, ``TokenRange`` feature is removed
from the ``misc`` field.


== Class word ==[word]
```
class word : public token {
 public:
  // form and misc are inherited from token
  int id;         // 0 is root, >0 is sentence word, <0 is undefined
  string lemma;   // lemma
  string upostag; // universal part-of-speech tag
  string xpostag; // language-specific part-of-speech tag
  string feats;   // list of morphological features
  int head;       // head, 0 is root, <0 is undefined
  string deprel;  // dependency relation to the head
  string deps;    // secondary dependencies

  vector<int> children;

  word(int id = -1, [string_piece #string_piece] form = string_piece());
};
```

The [``word`` #word] class represents a sentence word.
The [``word`` #word] fields correspond to [CoNLL-U fields http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html],
with the ``children`` field representing the opposite direction of
``head`` links (the elements of the ``children`` array are in ascending order).

== Class multiword_token ==[multiword_token]
```
class multiword_token : public token {
 public:
  // form and misc are inherited from token
  int id_first, id_last;

  multiword_token(int id_first = -1, int id_last = -1, [string_piece #string_piece] form = string_piece(), [string_piece #string_piece] misc = string_piece());
};
```

The [``multiword_token`` #multiword_token] represents a multi-word token
described in [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html].
The multi-word token has a ``form`` and a ``misc`` field, other CoNLL-U word
fields are guaranteed to be empty.


== Class empty_node ==[empty_node]
```
class empty_node {
 public:
  int id;         // 0 is root, >0 is sentence word, <0 is undefined
  int index;      // index for the current id, should be numbered from 1, 0=undefined
  string form;    // form
  string lemma;   // lemma
  string upostag; // universal part-of-speech tag
  string xpostag; // language-specific part-of-speech tag
  string feats;   // list of morphological features
  string deps;    // secondary dependencies
  string misc;    // miscellaneous information

  empty_node(int id = -1, int index = 0) : id(id), index(index) {}
};
```

The [``empty_node`` #empty_node] class represents an empty node from CoNLL-U 2.0,
with the fields corresponding to [CoNLL-U fields http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html].
For a specified ``id``, the ``index`` are numbered sequentially from 1.


== Class sentence ==[sentence]
```
class sentence {
 public:
  sentence();

  vector<[word #word]> words;
  vector<[multiword_token #multiword_token]> multiword_tokens;
  vector<empty_node> empty_nodes;
  vector<string> comments;
  static const string root_form;

  // Basic sentence modifications
  bool [empty #sentence_empty]();
  void [clear #sentence_clear]();
  [word #word]& [add_word #sentence_add_word]([string_piece #string_piece] form = string_piece());
  void [set_head #sentence_set_head](int id, int head, const string& deprel);
  void [unlink_all_words #sentence_unlink_all_words]();

  // CoNLL-U defined comments
  bool [get_new_doc #sentence_get_new_doc](string* id = nullptr) const;
  void [set_new_doc #sentence_set_new_doc](bool new_doc, [string_piece #string_piece] id = string_piece());
  bool [get_new_par #sentence_get_new_par](string* id = nullptr) const;
  void [set_new_par #sentence_set_new_par](bool new_par, [string_piece #string_piece] id = string_piece());
  bool [get_sent_id #sentence_get_sent_id](string& id) const;
  void [set_sent_id #sentence_set_sent_id]([string_piece #string_piece] id);
  bool [get_text #sentence_get_text](string& text) const;
  void [set_text #sentence_set_text]([string_piece #string_piece] text);
};
```

The [``sentence`` #sentence] class represents a sentence [CoNLL-U sentence http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html],
which consists of:
- sequence of [``word`` #word]s stored in ascending order, with the first word
  (with index 0) always being a technical root with form ``root_form``
- sequence of [``multiword_token`` #multiword_token]s also stored in ascending
  order
- sequence of [``empty_node`` #empty_node]s also stored in ascending order
- comments
-

Although you can manipulate the ``words`` directly, the
[``sentence`` #sentence] class offers several simple node manipulation methods.
There are also several methods manipulating CoNLL-U v2 comments.


=== sentence::empty() ===[sentence_empty]
``` bool empty();

Returns ``true`` if the sentence is empty. i.e., if it contains only a technical root node.

=== sentence::clear() ===[sentence_clear]
``` void clear();

Removes all words, multi-word tokens and comments (only the technical root ``word`` is kept).

=== sentence::add_word() ===[sentence_add_word]
``` [word #word]& add_word([string_piece #string_piece] form = string_piece());

Adds a new word to the sentence. The new word has first unused ``id``,
specified ``form`` and is not linked to any other node. Reference to the new
word is returned so that other fields can be also filled.

=== sentence:set_head() ===[sentence_set_head]
``` void set_head(int id, int head, const std::string& deprel);

Link the word ``id`` to the word ``head``, with the specified dependency relation.
If the ``head`` is negative, the word ``id`` is unlinked from its current head,
if any.

=== sentence::unlink_all_words() ===[sentence_unlink_all_words]
``` void unlink_all_words();

Unlink all words.

=== sentence::get_new_doc() ===[sentence_get_new_doc]
``` bool get_new_doc(string* id = nullptr) const;

Return ``true`` if ``# newdoc`` comment is present. Optionally,
document id is also returned (in ``# newdoc id = ...`` format).

=== sentence::set_new_doc() ===[sentence_set_new_doc]
``` void set_new_doc(bool new_doc, [string_piece #string_piece] id = string_piece());

Adds/removes ``# newdoc`` comment, optionally with a given
document id.

=== sentence::get_new_par() ===[sentence_get_new_par]
``` bool get_new_par(string* id = nullptr) const;

Return ``true`` if ``# newpar`` comment is present. Optionally,
paragraph id is also returned (in ``# newpar id = ...`` format).

=== sentence::set_new_par() ===[sentence_set_new_par]
``` void set_new_par(bool new_par, [string_piece #string_piece] id = string_piece());

Adds/removes ``# newpar`` comment, optionally with a given
paragraph id.

=== sentence::get_sent_id() ===[sentence_get_sent_id]
``` bool get_sent_id(string& id) const;

Return ``true`` if ``# sent_id = ...`` comment is present,
and fill given ``id`` with sentence id.

=== sentence::set_sent_id() ===[sentence_set_sent_id]
``` void set_sent_id([string_piece #string_piece] id);

Set the ``# sent_id = ...`` comment using given sentence id;
if the sentence id is empty, remove all present ``# sent_id`` comment.

=== sentence::get_text() ===[sentence_get_text]
``` bool get_text(string& text) const;

Return ``true`` if ``# text = ...`` comment is present,
and fill given ``text`` with sentence text.

=== sentence::set_text() ===[sentence_set_text]
``` void set_text([string_piece #string_piece] text);

Set the ``# text = ...`` comment using given text;
if the given text is empty, remove all present ``# text`` comment.


== Class input_format ==[input_format]
```
class input_format {
 public:
  virtual ~input_format() {}

  virtual bool [read_block #input_format_read_block](istream& is, string& block) const = 0;
  virtual void [reset_document #input_format_reset_document]([string_piece #string_piece] id = string_piece()) = 0;
  virtual void [set_text #input_format_set_text]([string_piece #string_piece] text, bool make_copy = false) = 0;
  virtual bool [next_sentence #input_format_next_sentence]([sentence #sentence]& s, string& error) = 0;

  // Static factory methods
  static [input_format #input_format]* [new_input_format #input_format_new_input_format](const string& name);
  static [input_format #input_format]* [new_conllu_input_format #input_format_new_conllu_input_format](const string& options = std::string());
  static [input_format #input_format]* [new_generic_tokenizer_input_format #input_format_new_generic_tokenizer_input_format](const string& options = std::string());
  static [input_format #input_format]* [new_horizontal_input_format #input_format_new_horizontal_input_format](const string& options = std::string());
  static [input_format #input_format]* [new_vertical_input_format #input_format_new_vertical_input_format](const string& options = std::string());

  static [input_format #input_format]* [new_presegmented_tokenizer #input_format_new_presegmented_tokenizer]([input_format #input_format]* tokenizer);

  static const string CONLLU_V1;
  static const string CONLLU_V2;
  static const string GENERIC_TOKENIZER_NORMALIZED_SPACES;
  static const string GENERIC_TOKENIZER_PRESEGMENTED;
  static const string GENERIC_TOKENIZER_RANGES;
};
```

The [``input_format`` #input_format] class allows loading sentences in various formats.

Th class instances may store internal state and are not thread-safe.

=== input_format::read_block() ===[input_format_read_block]
``` virtual bool read_block(istream& is, string& block) const = 0;

Read a portion of input, which is guaranteed to contain only complete
sentences. Such portion is usually a paragraph (text followed by an empty line)
or a line, but it may be more complex (i.e., in a XML-like format).


=== input_format::reset_document() ===[input_format_reset_document]
``` virtual void reset_document([string_piece #string_piece] id = string_piece()) = 0;

Resets the [``input_format`` #input_format] instance state. Such state
is needed not only for remembering unprocessed text of the last
[``set_text`` #input_format_set_text] call, but also for correct inter-block
state tracking (for example to track document-level ranges or inter-sentence spaces
-- if you pass only spaces to [``set_text`` #input_format_set_text], these
spaces has to accumulate and be returned as preceding spaces of the next
sentence).

If applicable, first read sentence will have the ``# newdoc`` comment, optionally
with given document id.

=== input_format::set_text() ===[input_format_set_text]
``` virtual void set_text([string_piece #string_piece] text, bool make_copy = false) = 0;

Set the text from which the sentences will be read.

If ``make_copy`` is ``false``, only a reference to the given text is
stored and the user has to make sure it exists until the instance
is destroyed or ``set_text`` is called again. If ``make_copy``
is ``true``, a copy of the given text is made and retained until the
instance is destroyed or ``set_text`` is called again.


=== input_format::next_sentence() ===[input_format_next_sentence]
``` virtual bool next_sentence([sentence #sentence]& s, string& error) = 0;

Try reading another sentence from the text specified by
[``set_text #input_format_set_text]. Returns ``true`` if the sentence was
read and ``false`` if the text ended or there was a read error. The latter
two conditions can be distinguished by the ``error`` parameter -- if it is
empty, the text ended, if it is nonempty, it contains a description of the
read error.


=== input_format::new_input_format() ===[input_format_new_input_format]
``` static [input_format #input_format]* new_input_format(const string& name);

Create new [``input_format`` #input_format] instance, given its name.
The individual input formats can be parametrized by using ``format=data``
syntax. The following input formats are currently supported:
- ``conllu``: return the [``new_conllu_input_format`` #input_format_new_conllu_input_format]
- ``generic_tokenizer``: return the [``new_generic_tokenizer_input_format`` #input_format_new_generic_tokenizer_input_format]
- ``horizontal``: return the [``new_horizontal_input_format`` #input_format_new_horizontal_input_format]
- ``vertical``: return the [``new_vertical_input_format`` #input_format_new_vertical_input_format]
-
The new instance must be deleted after use.


=== input_format::new_conllu_input_format() ===[input_format_new_conllu_input_format]
``` static [input_format #input_format]* new_conllu_input_format(const string() options = std::string());

Create [``input_format`` #input_format] instance which loads sentences
in the [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.github.io/docs/format.html].
The new instance must be deleted after use.

Supported options:
- ``v2`` (default): use CoNLL-U v2
- ``v1``: allow loading only CoNLL-U v1 (i.e., no empty nodes and no spaces in forms and lemmas)
-

=== input_format::new_generic_tokenizer_input_format() ===[input_format_new_generic_tokenizer_input_format]
``` static [input_format #input_format]* new_generic_tokenizer_input_format(const string() options = std::string());

Create rule-based generic tokenizer for English-like languages (with spaces
separating tokens and English-like punctuation). The new instance must be
deleted after use.

Supported options:
- ``normalized_spaces``: by default, UDPipe uses custom ``misc`` fields to exactly
  encode spaces in the original document. If ``normalized_spaces`` option is
  given, only standard CoNLL-U v2 markup (``SpaceAfter=No`` and ``# newpar``)
  is used.
- ``presegmented``: input is assumed to be already segmented, with every
  sentence on a line, and is only tokenized (respecting sentence breaks)
- ``ranges``: for every token, range in the original document is stored in
  a format described in [``token`` #token] class
-

=== input_format::new_horizontal_input_format() ===[input_format_new_horizontal_input_format]
``` static [input_format #input_format]* new_horizontal_input_format(const string() options = std::string());

Create [``input_format`` #input_format] instance which loads forms from a simple
horizontal format -- each sentence on a line, with word forms separated by spaces.
The new instance must be deleted after use.

In order to allow spaces in tokens, Unicode character 'NO-BREAK SPACE' (U+00A0)
is considered part of token and converted to a space during loading.


=== input_format::new_vertical_input_format() ===[input_format_new_vertical_input_format]
``` static [input_format #input_format]* new_vertical_input_format(const string() options = std::string());

Create [``input_format`` #input_format] instance which loads forms from a simple
vertical format -- each word on a line, with empty line denoting end of sentence.
The new instance must be deleted after use.


=== input_format::new_presegmented_tokenizer() ===[input_format_new_presegmented_tokenizer]
``` static [input_format #input_format]* new_presegmented_tokenizer([input_format #input_format]* tokenizer);

Create [``input_format`` #input_format] instance which acts as a tokenizer
adapter -- given a tokenizer which segments anywhere, it creates a tokenizer
which segments on newline characters (by calling the tokenizer on individual lines,
and if the tokenizer segments in the middle of the line, it calls it repeatedly
and merges the results).

The new instance must be deleted after use. Note that the new instance
//takes ownership// of the given ``tokenizer`` and //deletes// it during
its own deletion.


== Class output_format ==[output_format]
```
class output_format {
 public:
  virtual ~output_format() {}

  virtual void [write_sentence #output_format_write_sentence](const [sentence #sentence]& s, ostream& os) = 0;
  virtual void [finish_document #output_format_finish_document](ostream& os) {};

  // Static factory methods
  static [output_format #output_format]* [new_output_format #output_format_new_output_format](const string& name);
  static [output_format #output_format]* [new_conllu_output_format #output_format_new_conllu_output_format](const string() options = std::string());
  static [output_format #output_format]* [new_matxin_output_format #output_format_new_matxin_output_format](const string() options = std::string());
  static [output_format #output_format]* [new_horizontal_output_format #output_format_new_horizontal_output_format](const string() options = std::string());
  static [output_format #output_format]* [new_plaintext_output_format #output_format_new_plaintext_output_format](const string() options = std::string());
  static [output_format #output_format]* [new_vertical_output_format #output_format_new_vertical_output_format](const string() options = std::string());

  static const string CONLLU_V1;
  static const string CONLLU_V2;
  static const string HORIZONTAL_PARAGRAPHS;
  static const string PLAINTEXT_NORMALIZED_SPACES;
  static const string VERTICAL_PARAGRAPHS;
};
```

The [``output_format`` #output_format] class allows printing sentences
in various formats.

The class instances may store internal state and are not thread-safe.


=== output_format::write_sentence() ===[output_format_write_sentence]
``` virtual void write_sentence(const [sentence #sentence]& s, ostream& os) = 0;

Write given [``sentence`` #sentence] to the given output stream.

When the output format requires document-level markup, it is written
automatically when the first sentence is written using this
[``output_format`` #output_format] instance (or after
[``finish_document`` #output_format_finish_document] call).


=== output_format::finish_document() ===[output_format_finish_document]
``` virtual void finish_document(ostream& os) {};

When the output format requires document-level markup, write
the end-of-document mark and reset the [``output_format`` #output_format]
instance state (i.e., the next [``write_sentence`` #write_sentence]
will write start-of-document mark).


=== output_format::new_output_format() ===[output_format_new_output_format]
``` static [output_format #output_format]* new_output_format(const string& name);

Create new [``output_format`` #output_format] instance, given its name.
The following output formats are currently supported:
- ``conllu``: return the [``new_conllu_output_format`` #output_format_new_conllu_output_format]
- ``matxin``: return the [``new_matxin_output_format`` #output_format_new_matxin_output_format]
- ``horizontal``: return the [``new_horizontal_output_format`` #output_format_new_horizontal_output_format]
- ``plaintext``: return the [``new_plaintext_output_format`` #output_format_new_plaintext_output_format]
- ``vertical``: return the [``new_vertical_output_format`` #output_format_new_vertical_output_format]
-
The new instance must be deleted after use.

=== output_format::new_conllu_output_format() ===[output_format_new_conllu_output_format]
``` static [output_format #output_format]* new_conllu_output_format(const string() options = std::string());

Creates [``output_format`` #output_format] instance for writing sentences
in the [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.github.io/docs/format.html].
The new instance must be deleted after use.

Supported options:
- ``v2`` (default): use CoNLL-U v2
- ``v1``: produce output in CoNLL-U v1 format. Note that this is a lossy process, as
empty nodes are ignored and spaces in forms and lemmas are converted to underscores.
-

=== output_format::new_matxin_output_format() ===[output_format_new_matxin_output_format]
``` static [output_format #output_format]* new_matxin_output_format(const string() options = std::string());

Creates [``output_format`` #output_format] instance for writing sentences
in the Matxin format -- UDPipe produces a XML with the following DTD:
```
<!ELEMENT    corpus     (SENTENCE*)>
<!ELEMENT    SENTENCE   (NODE*)>
<!ATTLIST    SENTENCE    ord           CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         alloc         CDATA        #REQUIRED>
<!ELEMENT    NODE   (NODE*)>
<!ATTLIST    NODE        ord           CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         alloc         CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         form          CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         lem           CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         mi            CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         si            CDATA        #REQUIRED
                         sub           CDATA        #REQUIRED>
```
The new instance must be deleted after use.


=== output_format::new_plaintext_output_format() ===[output_format_new_plaintext_output_format]
``` static [output_format #output_format]* new_plaintext_output_format(const string() options = std::string());

Creates [``output_format`` #output_format] instance for writing sentence
//tokens// (in the UD sense) using original spacing.
By default, UDPipe custom ``misc`` features (see description of
[``token`` #token] class) are used to reconstruct the exact original spaces.
However, if the document does not contain these features or if only
normalized spacing is wanted, you can use the following option:
- ``normalized_spaces``: write one sentence on a line, and either one or no space between
  tokens, using the ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature
-


=== output_format::new_horizontal_output_format() ===[output_format_new_horizontal_output_format]
``` static [output_format #output_format]* new_horizontal_output_format(const string() options = std::string());

Creates [``output_format`` #output_format] instance for writing sentences
in a simple horizontal format -- each sentence on a line, with word forms separated
by spaces. The new instance must be deleted after use.

Because words can contain spaces in CoNLL-U v2, the spaces in words are
converted to Unicode character 'NO-BREAK SPACE' (U+00A0).

Supported options:
- ``paragraphs``: if given, an empty line is printed after the end of a paragraph
or a document (recognized by ``# newpar`` or ``# newdoc`` comments)
-


=== output_format::new_vertical_output_format() ===[output_format_new_vertical_output_format]
``` static [output_format #output_format]* new_vertical_output_format(const string() options = std::string());

Creates [``output_format`` #output_format] instance for writing sentences
in a simple vertical format -- each word form on a line, with empty line
denoting end of sentence. The new instance must be deleted after use.

Supported options:
- ``paragraphs``: if given, an empty line is printed after the end of a paragraph
or a document (recognized by ``# newpar`` or ``# newdoc`` comments)
-


== Class model ==[model]
```
class model {
 public:
  virtual ~model() {}

  static [model #model]* [load #model_load_cstring](const char* fname);
  static [model #model]* [load #model_load_istream](istream& is);

  virtual [input_format #input_format]* [new_tokenizer #model_new_tokenizer](const string& options) const = 0;
  virtual bool [tag #model_tag]([sentence #sentence]& s, const string& options, string& error) const = 0;
  virtual bool [parse #model_parse]([sentence #sentence]& s, const string& options, string& error) const = 0;

  static const string DEFAULT;
  static const string TOKENIZER_NORMALIZED_SPACES;
  static const string TOKENIZER_PRESEGMENTED;
  static const string TOKENIZER_RANGES;
};
```

Class representing UDPipe model, allowing to perform tokenization,
tagging and parsing.

=== model::load(const char*) ===[model_load_cstring]

``` static [model #model]* load(const char* fname);

Load a new model from a given file, returning ``NULL`` on failure.
The new instance must be deleted after use.


=== model::load(istream&) ===[model_load_istream]

``` static [model #model]* load(istream& is);

Load a new model from a given input stream, returning ``NULL`` on failure.
The new instance must be deleted after use.

=== model::new_tokenizer() ===[model_new_tokenizer]

``` virtual [input_format #input_format]* new_tokenizer(const string& options) const = 0;

Construct a new tokenizer (or ``NULL`` if no tokenizer is specified by the model).
The new instance must be deleted after use.


=== model::tag() ===[model_tag]

``` virtual bool tag([sentence #sentence]& s, const string& options, string& error) const = 0;

Tag the given sentence.


=== model::parse() ===[model_parse]

``` virtual bool parse([sentence #sentence]& s, const string& options, string& error) const = 0;

Parse the given sentence.


== Class pipeline ==[pipeline]
```
class pipeline {
 public:
  pipeline(const [model #model]* m, const string& input, const string& tagger, const string& parser, const string& output);

  void [set_model #pipeline_set_model](const [model #model]* m);
  void [set_input #pipeline_set_input](const string& input);
  void [set_tagger #pipeline_set_tagger](const string& tagger);
  void [set_parser #pipeline_set_parser](const string& parser);
  void [set_output #pipeline_set_output](const string& output);

  void [set_immediate #pipeline_set_immediate](bool immediate);
  void [set_document_id #pipeline_set_document_id[(const string& document_id);

  bool [process #pipeline_process](istream& is, ostream& os, string& error) const;

  static const string DEFAULT;
  static const string NONE;
};
```

The [``pipeline`` #pipeline] class allows simple file-to-file processing.
A model and input/tagger/parser/output options can be specified in the pipeline.

The input file can be processed either after fully loaded (default),
or in immediate mode, in which case is the input processed and printed as soon
as a block of input guaranteed to contain whole sentences is loaded.
Specifically, for most input formats the input is processed after loading an
empty line (with the exception of ``horizontal`` input format and
``presegmented`` tokenizer, where the input is processed after loading every
line).

=== pipeline::set_model() ===[pipeline_set_model]
``` void set_model(const [model #model]* m);

Use the given model.

=== pipeline::set_input() ===[pipeline_set_input]
``` void set_input(const string& input);

Use the given input format. In addition to formats described in
[``new_input_format`` #input_format_new_input_format], a special
``tokenizer`` or ``tokenizer=options`` format allows using the
model tokenizer.

=== pipeline::set_tagger() ===[pipeline_set_tagger]
``` void set_tagger(const string& tagger);

Use the given tagger options.

=== pipeline::set_parser() ===[pipeline_set_parser]
``` void set_parser(const string& parser);

Use the given parser options.

=== pipeline::set_output() ===[pipeline_set_output]
``` void set_output(const string& output);

Use the given output format (see
[``new_output_format`` #output_format_new_output_format] for a list).

=== pipeline::set_immediate() ===[pipeline_set_immediate]
``` void set_immediate(bool immediate);

Set or reset the immediate mode (default is ``immediate=false``).


=== pipeline::set_document_id() ===[pipeline_set_document_id]
``` void set_document_id(const string& document_id);

Set document id, which is passed to
[``input_format::reset_document`` #input_format_reset_document]).

=== pipeline::process() ===[pipeline_process]
``` bool process(istream& is, ostream& os, string& error) const;

Process the given input stream, writing results to the given output stream.
If the processing succeeded, ``true`` is returned; otherwise, ``false``
is returned with an error stored in the ``error`` argument.


== Class trainer ==[trainer]
```
class trainer {
 public:
  static bool [train #trainer_train](const string& method, const vector<[sentence #sentence]>& train, const vector<[sentence #sentence]>& heldout,
                    const string& tokenizer, const string& tagger, const string& parser,
                    ostream& os, string& error);

  static const string DEFAULT;
  static const string NONE;
};
```

Class allowing training a UDPipe model.

=== trainer::train() ===[trainer_train]
```
static bool train(const string& method, const vector<[sentence #sentence]>& train, const vector<[sentence #sentence]>& heldout,
                  const string& tokenizer, const string& tagger, const string& parser,
                  ostream& os, string& error);
```

Train a UDPipe model. The only supported method is currently ``morphodita_parsito``.
Use the supplied train and heldout data, and given tokenizer, tagger and parser
options (see the Training UDPipe Models section in the User's Manual).

If the training succeeded, ``true`` is returned and the model is saved to the
given ``os`` stream; otherwise, ``false`` is returned with an error stored in
the ``error`` argument.


== Class evaluator ==[evaluator]
```
class evaluator {
 public:
  evaluator(const [model #model]* m, const string& tokenizer, const string& tagger, const string& parser);

  void [set_model #evaluator_set_model](const [model #model]* m);
  void [set_tokenizer #evaluator_set_tokenizer](const string& tokenizer);
  void [set_tagger #evaluator_set_tagger](const string& tagger);
  void [set_parser #evaluator_set_parser](const string& parser);

  bool [evaluate #evaluator_evaluate](istream& is, ostream& os, string& error) const;

  static const string DEFAULT;
  static const string NONE;
};
```

Class evaluating performance of given model on CoNLL-U file.

Three different settings (depending on whether tokenizer, tagger and parser is used)
can be evaluated. For details, see Measuring Model Accuracy in User's Manual.


=== evaluator::set_model() ===[evaluator_set_model]
``` void set_model(const [model #model]* m);

Use the given model.


=== evaluator::set_tokenizer() ===[evaluator_set_tokenizer]
``` void set_tokenizer(const string& tokenizer);

Use the given tokenizer options; pass ``DEFAULT`` to use default
options or ``NONE`` not to use a tokenizer.


=== evaluator::set_tagger() ===[evaluator_set_tagger]
``` void set_tagger(const string& tagger);

Use the given tagger options; pass ``DEFAULT`` to use default
options or ``NONE`` not to use a tagger.


=== evaluator::set_parser() ===[evaluator_set_parser]
``` void set_parser(const string& parser);

Use the given parser options; pass ``DEFAULT`` to use default
options or ``NONE`` not to use a parser.


=== evaluator::evaluate() ===[evaluator_evaluate]
``` bool evaluate(istream& is, ostream& os, string& error) const;

Evaluate the specified model on the given CoNLL-U input read
from ``is`` stream.

If the evaluation succeeded, ``true`` is returned and the evaluation
results are written to the ``os`` stream in a plain text format;
otherwise, ``false`` is returned with an error stored in
the ``error`` argument.


== Class version ==[version]
```
class version {
 public:
  unsigned major;
  unsigned minor;
  unsigned patch;
  string prerelease;

  static [version #version] [current #version_current]();
};
```

The [``version`` #version] class represents UDPipe version.
See [UDPipe Versioning #versioning] for more information.

=== version::current ===[version_current]
``` static [version #version] current();

Returns current UDPipe version.


== C++ Bindings API ==[cpp_bindings_api]

Bindings for other languages than C++ are created using SWIG from the C++
bindings API, which is a slightly modified version of the native C++ API.
Main changes are replacement of [``string_piece`` #string_piece] type by native
strings and removal of methods using ``istream``. Here is the C++ bindings API
declaration:

%!include: manual_bindings_api.t2t

== C# Bindings ==[csharp_bindings]

%!include: manual_bindings_csharp_api.t2t

== Java Bindings ==[java_bindings]

%!include: manual_bindings_java_api.t2t

== Perl Bindings ==[perl_bindings]

%!include: manual_bindings_perl_api.t2t

== Python Bindings ==[python_bindings]

%!include: manual_bindings_python_api.t2t
