UDPipe
Version 1.2.1-devel

= Introduction =[introduction]

%!include: manual_about.t2t


= Online Web Application and Web Service =[online]

%!include: manual_online.t2t


= Release =[release]

== Download ==[download]

UDPipe releases are available on [GitHub http://github.com/ufal/udpipe], both as
source code and as a pre-compiled binary package. The binary package contains Linux,
Windows and OS X binaries, Java bindings binary, C# bindings binary, and source
code of UDPipe and all language bindings). While the binary
packages do not contain compiled Python or Perl bindings, packages for those
languages are available in standard package repositories,
i.e. on [PyPI https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ufal.udpipe/]
and [CPAN https://metacpan.org/pod/Ufal::UDPipe].

- [Latest release http://github.com/ufal/udpipe/releases/latest]
- [All releases http://github.com/ufal/udpipe/releases], [Changelog https://github.com/ufal/udpipe/blob/master/CHANGES]


You might also be interested in a contributed package
[spacy-udpipe https://github.com/TakeLab/spacy-udpipe] which wraps UDPipe
with spaCy API.

=== Available Models ===[available_models]

To use UDPipe, a model is needed. The models are available
from [LINDAT/CLARIN http://www.lindat.cz] infrastructure and described further
in the
%web% [UDPipe User's Manual udpipe/models].
%manual% [UDPipe User's Manual #models].
Currently, the following models are available:

- Universal Dependencies 2.5 Models: [udpipe-ud2.5-191206 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3131] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#universal_dependencies_25_models])
- Universal Dependencies 2.4 Models: [udpipe-ud2.4-190531 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2998] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#universal_dependencies_24_models])
- Universal Dependencies 2.3 Models: [udpipe-ud2.3-181115 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2898] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#universal_dependencies_23_models])
- CoNLL18 Shared Task Baseline UD 2.2 Models: [udpipe-ud2.2-conll18-180430 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2859] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#conll18_shared_task_baseline_ud_22_models])
- Universal Dependencies 2.0 Models: [udpipe-ud2.0-170801 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2364] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#universal_dependencies_20_models])
- CoNLL17 Shared Task Baseline UD 2.0 Models: [udpipe-ud2.0-conll17-170315 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1990] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#conll17_shared_task_baseline_ud_20_models])
- Universal Dependencies 1.2 Models: [udpipe-ud1.2-160523 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1659] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe/models#universal_dependencies_12_models])


== License ==[license]

UDPipe is an open-source project and is freely available for non-commercial
purposes. The library is distributed under
[Mozilla Public License 2.0 http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/] and the associated models and data
under [CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/], although
for some models the original data used to create the model may impose
additional licensing conditions.

If you use this tool for scientific work, please give credit to us by
referencing [Straka et al. 2016 #bibtex_for_referencing] and the
[UDPipe website http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe].


= UDPipe Installation =[installation]

%web% [UDPipe Installation is available on a separate page. udpipe/install]
%manual% %!include: manual_install.t2t


= UDPipe Models =[models]

%web% [UDPipe Models are available on a separate page. udpipe/models]
%manual% %!include: manual_models.t2t


= UDPipe User's Manual =[users_manual]

%web% [UDPipe User's Manual is available on a separate page. udpipe/users-manual]
%manual% %!include: manual_user.t2t


= UDPipe API Reference =[api_reference]

%web% [UDPipe API Reference is available on a separate page. udpipe/api-reference]
%manual% %!include: manual_api_reference.t2t


= Contact =[contact]

Authors:
- [Milan Straka http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/milan-straka], straka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz


[UDPipe website http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/udpipe].

[UDPipe LINDAT/CLARIN entry http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1702].


= Acknowledgements =[udpipe_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

%web% Acknowledgements for individual language models are listed in the [UDPipe User's Manual page udpipe/users-manual].
%manual% Acknowledgements for individual language models are listed in [UDPipe User's Manual #users_manual].


== Publications ==[publications]

- (Straka et al. 2017) Milan Straka and Jana Straková. //[Tokenizing, POS Tagging, Lemmatizing and Parsing UD 2.0 with UDPipe http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~straka/papers/2017-conll_udpipe.pdf]//. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies, Vancouver, Canada, August 2017.
- (Straka et al. 2016) Straka Milan, Hajič Jan, Straková Jana. //[UDPipe: Trainable Pipeline for Processing CoNLL-U Files Performing Tokenization, Morphological Analysis, POS Tagging and Parsing http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~straka/papers/2016-lrec_udpipe.pdf]//. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Portorož, Slovenia, May 2016.
-

== Bibtex for Referencing ==[bibtex_for_referencing]

```
@InProceedings{udpipe:2017,
  author    = {Straka, Milan  and  Strakov\'{a}, Jana},
  title     = {Tokenizing, POS Tagging, Lemmatizing and Parsing UD 2.0 with UDPipe},
  booktitle = {Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies},
  month     = {August},
  year      = {2017},
  address   = {Vancouver, Canada},
  publisher = {Association for Computational Linguistics},
  pages     = {88--99},
  url       = {http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K/K17/K17-3009.pdf}
}
```

== Persistent Identifier ==[persistent_identifier]

If you prefer to reference UDPipe by a persistent identifier (PID),
you can use ``http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1702``.
