Universal Dependencies 1.2 Models for UDPipe
============================================

== Universal Dependencies 1.2 Models ==[universal_dependencies_12_models]

Universal Dependencies 1.2 Models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/] licence.
The models are based solely on
[Universal Dependencies 1.2 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1548] treebanks.
The models work in UDPipe version 1.0.

Universal Dependencies 1.2 Models are versioned according to the date released
in the format ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``, ``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit
representation of year, month and day, respectively. The latest version is TODO.


=== Download ===[universal_dependencies_12_models_download]

The latest version TODO of the Czech MorphoDiTa models can be downloaded
from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository TODO].


=== Acknowledgements ===[universal_dependencies_12_models_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or
distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the
Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

The models were trained on [Universal Dependencies 1.2 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1548] treebanks.


==== Publications ====[universal_dependencies_12_models_publications]

- (Straka et al. 2016) Straka Milan, Hajič Jan, Straková Jana. //UDPipe: Trainable Pipeline for Processing CoNLL-U Files Performing Tokenization, Morphological Analysis, POS Tagging and Parsing.// To appear at LREC 2016.
-

=== Model Description ===[universal_dependencies_12_models_description]

TODO
