UDPipe User's Manual
====================

This section describes the command line tools. The C++ API is described
%web% [on the API Reference page api-reference].
%manual% [in the API Reference section #api-reference].


== Running UDPipe ==[run_udpipe]

Probably the most common usage of UDPipe is to tokenize, tag and parse the input using
``` udpipe --tokenize --tag --parse udpipe_model

The input is assumed to be in UTF-8 encoding and can be either already tokenized
and segmented, or it can be a plain text which will be tokenized and segmented automatically.

Any number of input files can be specified after the ``udpipe_model`` and if no
file is given, the standard input is used. The output is by default
saved to the standard output, but if ``--outfile=name`` is used, it is saved
to the given file name. The output file name can contain a ``{}``, which is
replaced by a base name of the processed file (i.e., without directories
and an extension).

The full command syntax of running UDPipe is
```
Usage: udpipe [running_opts] udpipe_model [input_files]
       udpipe --train [training_opts] udpipe_model [input_files]
       udpipe --detokenize [detokenize_opts] raw_text_file [input_files]
Running opts: --accuracy (measure accuracy only)
              --input=[conllu|generic_tokenizer|horizontal|vertical]
              --immediate (process sentences immediately during loading)
              --outfile=output file template
              --output=[conllu|matxin|horizontal|plaintext|vertical]
              --tokenize (perform tokenization)
              --tokenizer=tokenizer options, implies --tokenize
              --tag (perform tagging)
              --tagger=tagger options, implies --tag
              --parse (perform parsing)
              --parser=parser options, implies --parse
Training opts: --method=[morphodita_parsito] which method to use
               --heldout=heldout data file name
               --tokenizer=tokenizer options
               --tagger=tagger options
               --parser=parser options
Detokenize opts: --outfile=output file template
Generic opts: --version
              --help
```

=== Immediate Mode ===[run_udpipe_immediate]

By default UDPipe loads the whole input file into memory before starting
to process it. That allows to store the space markup (see the following Tokenizer
section) in most consistent way, i.e., store all spaces following a sentence
in the last token of that sentence.

However, sometimes it is desirable to process the input as soon as possible,
which can be achieved by specifying the ``--immediate`` option. In immediate mode,
the input is processed and printed as soon as a block of input guaranteed to contain
whole sentences is loaded. Specifically, for most input formats the input is
processed after loading an empty line (with the exception of ``horizontal``
input format and ``presegmented`` tokenizer, where the input is processed after
each line).


=== Loading Model On Demand ===[run_udpipe_model_on_demand]

Although a model for UDPipe always has to be specified, the model is loaded
only if really needed. It is therefore possible to use for example ``none``
as the model in case it is not required for performing the requested
operation (e.g., converting between formats or using a generic tokenizer).


=== Tokenizer ===[run_udpipe_tokenizer]

If the ``--tokenize`` option is supplied, the input is assumed to be
plain text and is tokenized using model tokenizer. Additional arguments to the
tokenizer might be specified using ``--tokenizer=data`` option (which implies
``--tokenize``), where ``data`` is a semicolon-separated list of the following options:
- ``normalized_spaces``: by default, UDPipe uses custom MISC fields to exactly
  encode spaces in the original document (as described below). If the
  ``normalized_spaces`` option is given, only the standard CoNLL-U v2 markup
  (``SpaceAfter=No`` and ``# newpar``) is used.
- ``presegmented``: the input file is assumed to be already segmented, with each
  sentence on a separate line, and is only tokenized (respecting sentence breaks)
- ``ranges``: for each token, a range in the original document is stored in the
  format described below.
- ``joint_with_parsing``: an experimental mode performing sentence segmentation
  jointly using the tokenizer and the parser (see //[Milan Straka and Jana Straková: Tokenizing, POS Tagging, Lemmatizing and Parsing UD 2.0 with UDPipe http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~straka/papers/2017-conll_udpipe.pdf]// paper for details).
  The following options are utilized:
  - ``joint_max_sentence_len`` (default 20): maximum sentence length
  - ``joint_change_boundary_logprob`` (default -0.5): logprob of using sentence boundary not generated by the tokenizer
  - ``joint_sentence_logprob`` (default -0.5): additional logprob of every sentence
  -
  The logprob of a sentence is computed using logprob of its best dependency parsing tree,
  together with ``joint_sentence_logprob`` and also ``joint_change_boundary_logprob``
  for every sentence boundary not returned by the tokenizer (i.e., either 0, 1 or 2 times).
  The joint sentence segmentation chooses such a segmentation, where every
  sentence has length at most ``joint_max_sentence_len`` and the sum of logprobs of all sentences
  is as large as possible.
-

==== Preserving Original Spaces ====[run_udpipe_tokenizer_spaces]

By default, UDPipe uses custom MISC fields to store all spaces in the original
document. This markup is backward compatible with CoNLL-U v2 ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature.
This markup can be utilized by the ``plaintext`` output format, which allows reconstructing
the original document.

Note that in theory not only spaces, but also other original content can be saved in this
way (for example XML tags if the input was encoded in a XML file).

The markup uses the following MISC fields on //tokens// (not words in multi-word tokens):
- ``SpacesBefore=content`` (by default empty): spaces/other content preceding the token
- ``SpacesAfter=content`` (by default a space if ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature is not present, empty otherwise):
  spaces/other content following the token
- ``SpacesInToken=content`` (by default equal to the FORM of the token): FORM of the token
  including original spaces (this is needed only if tokens are allowed to contain spaces and
  a token contains a tab or newline characters)
-

The ``content`` of all the three fields must be escaped to allow storing tabs and newlines.
The following C-like schema is used:
- ``\s``: space
- ``\t``: tab
- ``\r``: CR character
- ``\n``: LF character
- ``\p``: | (pipe character)
- ``\\``: \ (backslash character)
-

==== Preserving Token Ranges ====[run_udpipe_tokenizer_ranges]

When the ``ranges`` tokenizer option is used, the range of each token in the original document
is stored in the ``TokenRange`` MISC field.

The format of the ``TokenRange`` field (inspired by Python) is ``TokenRange=start:end``,
where ``start`` is a zero-based document-level index of the start of the token
(counted in Unicode characters) and ``end`` is a zero-based document-level index
of the first character following the token (i.e., the length of the token is ``end-start``).


=== Input Formats ===[run_udpipe_input]

If the tokenizer is not used, the input format can be specified using the
``--input`` option. The individual input formats can be parametrized in the
same way a tokenizer is, by using ``format=data`` syntax. Currently supported
input formats are:
- ``conllu`` (default): the [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html].
  Supported options:
  - ``v2`` (default): use CoNLL-U v2
  - ``v1``: allow loading only CoNLL-U v1 (i.e., no empty nodes and no spaces in forms and lemmas)
  -
- ``generic_tokenizer``: generic tokenizer for English-like languages (with spaces separating tokens
  and English-like punctuation). The tokenizer is rule-based and needs no trained model.
  It supports the same options as a model tokenizer, i.e., ``normalized_spaces``, ``presegmented``
  and ``ranges``.
- ``horizontal``: each sentence on a separate line, with tokens separated by spaces. In order to allow
  spaces in tokens, Unicode character 'NO-BREAK SPACE' (U+00A0) is considered part of token
  and converted to a space during loading.
- ``vertical``: each token on a separate line, with an empty line denoting end of sentence;
  only the first tab-separated word is used as a token, the rest of the line is ignored.
-

Note that a model tokenizer can be specified using the ``--input`` option too, by
using the ``tokenizer`` input format, for example using ``--input tokenizer=ranges``.


=== Tagger ===[run_udpipe_tagger]

If the ``--tag`` option is supplied, the input is POS tagged and lemmatized
using the model tagger. Additional arguments to the tagger might be
specified using the ``--tagger=data`` option (which implies ``--tag``).


=== Dependency Parsing ===[run_udpipe_parser]

If the ``--parse`` option is supplied, the input is parsed using
the model dependency parser.  Additional arguments to the parser might be
specified using the ``--parser=data`` option (which implies ``--parse``).


=== Output Formats ===[run_udpipe_output]

The output format is specified using the ``--output`` option. The individual
output formats can be parametrized in the same way as input formats, by using the
``format=data`` syntax. Currently supported output formats are:
- ``conllu`` (default): the [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html]
  Supported options:
  - ``v2`` (default): use CoNLL-U v2
  - ``v1``: produce output in CoNLL-U v1 format. Note that this is a lossy process, as
  empty nodes are ignored and spaces in forms and lemmas are converted to underscores.
  -
- ``matxin``: the [Matxin format http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Matxin]
- ``horizontal``: writes the //words// (in the UD sense) in horizontal format,
  that is, each sentence is on a separate line, with words separated by
  a single space. Because words can contain spaces in CoNLL-U v2, the spaces in
  words are converted to Unicode character 'NO-BREAK SPACE' (U+00A0).
  Supported options:
  - ``paragraphs``: an empty line is printed after the end of a paragraph
  or a document (recognized by ``# newpar`` or ``# newdoc`` comments)
  -
- ``plaintext``: writes the //tokens// (in the UD sense) using original spacing.
  By default, UDPipe's custom MISC features (``SpacesBefore``, ``SpacesAfter`` and ``SpacesInToken``,
  see the description in the Tokenizer section) are used to reconstruct the exact original spaces.
  However, if the document does not contain these features or if you want only normalized
  spacing, you can use the following option:
  - ``normalized_spaces``: write one sentence on a line, and either one or no space between
  tokens according to the ``SpaceAfter=No`` feature
  -
- ``vertical``: each word on a separate line, with an empty line denoting the end of sentence.
  Supported options:
  - ``paragraphs``: an empty line is printed after the end of a paragraph
  or a document (recognized by ``# newpar`` or ``# newdoc`` comments)
  -
-


== Running the UDPipe REST Server ==[udpipe_server]

UDPipe also provides a REST server binary called ``udpipe_server``.
The binary uses [MicroRestD http://github.com/ufal/microrestd] as a REST
server implementation and provides
[UDPipe REST API http://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/services/udpipe/api-reference.php].

The full command syntax of ``udpipe_server`` is
```
udpipe_server [options] port default_model (model_ids model_file acknowledgements)*
Options: --concurrent_models=maximum concurrently loaded models (default 10)
         --daemon (daemonize after start)
         --log_file=filename (file to use for traffic logging, empty for no log)
         --log_request_max_size=size (log at most this many chars in every request)
         --no_check_models_loadable (do not check models are loadable)
         --no_preload_default (do not preload default model)
```

The ``udpipe_server`` can run either in foreground or in background (when
``--daemon`` is used).

For every model, you specify three arguments:
- ``model_ids``: possibly multiple model ids, separated by a semicolon. Note
  that apart from splitting on semicolon, every hyphen-separated prefix of
  any id is also considered an id
- ``model_file``: filename containing the model
- ``acknowledgements``: if non-empty, it is added to a list of acknowledgements
  returned when using this model
-

Since UDPipe 1.1.1, the models are loaded on demand, so that at most
``concurrent_models`` (default 10) are kept in memory at the same time.
The model files are opened during start and never closed until the server
stops. Unless ``no_check_models_loadable`` is specified, the model files
are also checked to be loadable during start. Note that the default model
is preloaded and never released, unless ``no_preload_default`` is given.
(Before UDPipe 1.1.1, specified model files were loaded during start and
kept in memory all the time.)

== Training UDPipe Models ==[model_training]

Custom UDPipe models can be trained using the following syntax:
``` udpipe --train model.output [--heldout=heldout_data] training_file ...

The training data should be in the [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html].

By default, three model components are trained -- tokenizer, tagger and
parser.  Any subset of the model components can be trained and a model
component may be copied from an existing model.

The training options are specified for each model component separately
using the ``--tokenizer``, ``--tagger`` and ``--parser`` options.
If a model component should not be trained, value ``none`` should
be used (e.g., ``--tagger=none``).

The options are ``name=value`` pairs separated by a semicolon. The
value can be either a simple string value (ending by a semicolon),
file content specified as ``name=file:filename``, or an arbitrary
string value specified as ``name=data:length:value``, where the value
is exactly ``length`` bytes long.

=== Reusing Components from Existing Models ===[model_training_reusing_components]

The model components (tagger, parser or tagger) can be reused from
existing models, by specifying the ``from_model=file:filename`` option.

=== Random Hyperparameter Search ===[model_training_random_search]

The default values of hyperparameters are set to the values
which were used the most during UD 1.2 models training, but if you
want to reach best performance, the hyperparameters must be tuned.

Apart from manual grid search, UDPipe can perform a simple random search.
You can perform the random search by repeatedly training UDPipe
(preferably in parallel, most likely on different computers)
while specifying different training run number -- some of the
hyperparameters (chosen by us; you can of course override their value
by specifying it on the command line) change their values in different
training runs. The pseudorandom sequences of hyperparameters
are of course deterministic.

The training run can be specified by providing the ``run=number`` option
to a model component. The run number 1 is the default one (with the best
hyperparameters for the UD 1.2 models), run numbers 2 and more randomize
the hyperparameters.

=== Tokenizer ===[model_training_tokenizer]

The tokenizer is trained using the ``SpaceAfter=No`` features in the CoNLL-U files.
If the feature is not present, a //detokenizer// can be used to guess
the ``SpaceAfter=No`` features according to a supplied plain text
(which typically does not overlap with the texts in the CoNLL-U files).

In order to use the detokenizer, use the ``detokenizer=file:filename_with_plaintext``
option. In UD 1.2 models, the optimal performance is achieved with very small plain
texts -- only 500kB.

The tokenizer recognizes the following options:
- ``tokenize_url`` (default 1): tokenize URLs and emails using a manually
    implemented recognizer
- ``allow_spaces`` (default 1 if any token contains a space, 0 otherwise): allow tokens to contain spaces
- ``dimension`` (default 24): dimension of character embeddings and of the per-character bidirectional
    GRU. Note that inference time is quadratic in this parameter. Supported values
    are only 16, 24 and 64, with 64 needed for languages with complicated tokenization
    like Japanese, Chinese or Vietnamese or complicated segmentation.
- ``segment_size`` (default 50): length of character segment used to predict token and sentence breaks.
    Larger values like 200 are needed for languges with complicated segmentation
- ``epochs`` (default 100): the number of epochs to train the tokenizer for
- ``batch_size`` (default 50): batch size (number of segments) used during tokenizer training
- ``learning_rate`` (default 0.005): the learning rate used during tokenizer training
- ``learning_rate_final`` (default 0.0): if not zero, use exponential learning rate decay so that
    last epoch uses this learning rate
- ``dropout`` (default 0.1): dropout used during tokenizer training
- ``early_stopping`` (default 1 if heldout is given, 0 otherwise): perform
    early stopping, choosing training iteration maximizing sentences F1 score plus
    tokens F1 score on heldout data
-


During random hyperparameter search, ``batch_size`` is chosen uniformly from //{50,100}//
and ``learning_rate`` logarithmically from //<0.0005, 0.01)//.


==== Detokenizing CoNLL-U Files ====[model_training_detokenizer]

The ``--detokenizer`` option allows generating the ``SpaceAfter=No`` features
automatically from a given plain text. Even if the current algorithm is very
simple and makes quite a lot of mistakes, the tokenizer trained on generated
features is very close to a tokenizer trained on gold ``SpaceAfter=No``
features (the difference in token F1 score is usually one or two tenths of percent).

The generated ``SpaceAfter=No`` features are only used during tokenizer
training, not printed. However, if you would like to obtain the CoNLL-U files
with automatic detokenization (generated ``SpaceAfter=No`` features), you can
run UDPipe with the ``--detokenize`` option. In this case, you have to supply
plain text in the given language (usually the best results are achieved with
just 500kB or 1MB of text) and UDPipe then detokenizes all the given CoNLL-U files.

The complete usage of the ``--detokenize`` option is:
```
udpipe --detokenize [detokenize_opts] raw_text_file [input_files]
Detokenize opts: --outfile=output file template
```


=== Tagger ===[model_training_tagger]

The tagging is currently performed using [MorphoDiTa http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita].
The UDPipe tagger consists of possibly several MorphoDiTa models, each tagging
some of the POS tags and/or lemmas.

By default, only one model is constructed, which generates all available tags (UPOS,
XPOS, Feats and Lemma). However, we found out during the UD 1.2 models training
that performance improves if one model tags the UPOS, XPOS and Feats tags, while the
other is performing lemmatization. Therefore, if you utilize two MorphoDiTa models,
by default the first one generates all tags (except lemmas) and the second one performs lemmatization.

The number of MorphoDiTa models can be specified using the ``models=number`` parameter.
All other parameters may be either generic for all models (``guesser_suffix_rules=5``),
or specific for a given model (``guesser_suffix_rules_2=6``), including the
``from_model`` option (therefore, MorphoDiTa models can be trained separately
and then combined together into one UDPipe model).

Every model utilizes UPOS for disambiguation and the first model is the one producing
the UPOS tags on output.

The tagger recognizes the following options:
- ``use_lemma`` (default for the second model and also if there is only one model): use the
  lemma field internally to perform disambiguation; the lemma may be not outputted
- ``provide_lemma`` (default for the second model and also if there is only one model):
  produce the disambiguated lemma on output
- ``use_xpostag`` (default for the first model): use the
  XPOS tags internally to perform disambiguation; it may not be outputted
- ``provide_xpostag`` (default for the first model): produce the disambiguated XPOS tag on output
- ``use_feats`` (default for the first model): use the
  Feats internally to perform disambiguation; it may not be outputted
- ``provide_feats`` (default for the first model): produce the disambiguated Feats field on output
- ``dictionary_max_form_analyses`` (default 0 - unlimited): the maximum number of
  (most frequent) form analyses from UD training data that are to be
  kept in the morphological dictionary
- ``dictionary_file`` (default empty): use a given custom morphological dictionary, where each line contains
  5 tab-separated fields FORM, LEMMA, UPOSTAG, XPOSTAG and FEATS. Note that this dictionary
  data is appended to the dictionary created from the UD training data, not replacing it.
- ``guesser_suffix_rules`` (default 8): number of rules generated for every suffix
- ``guesser_prefixes_max`` (default 4 if ``provide_lemma`, 0 otherwise): maximum
  number of form-generating prefixes to use in the guesser
- ``guesser_prefix_min_count`` (default 10): minimum number of occurrences of form-generating
  prefix to consider using it in the guesser
- ``guesser_enrich_dictionary`` (default 6 if no ``dictionary_file`` is passed, 0 otherwise): number of rules generated for forms present
  in training data (assuming that the analyses from the training data may not be all)
- ``iterations`` (default 20): number of training iterations to perform
- ``early_stopping`` (default 1 if heldout is given, 0 otherwise): perform
    early stopping, choosing training iteration maximizing tagging accuracy on the heldout data
- ``templates`` (default ``lemmatizer`` for second model, ``tagger`` otherwise): MorphoDiTa
    feature templates to use, either ``lemmatizer`` which focuses more on lemmas, or
    ``tagger`` which focuses more on UPOS/XPOS/FEATS
-

During random hyperparameter search, ``guesser_suffix_rules`` is chosen uniformly from
//{5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12}// and ``guesser_enrich_dictionary`` is chosen uniformly from
//{3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10}//.


=== Parser ===[model_training_parser]

The parsing is performed using [Parsito http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/parsito], which is a
transition-based parser using a neural-network classifier.

The transition-based systems can be configured by the following options:
- ``transition_system`` (default projective): which transition system to use for parsing (language dependent, you can choose according
  to language properties or try all and choose the best one)
  - ``projective``: projective stack-based arc standard system with ``shift``, ``left_arc`` and ``right_arc`` transitions
  - ``swap``: fully non-projective system which extends ``projective`` system by adding the ``swap`` transition
  - ``link2``: partially non-projective system which extends ``projective`` system by adding ``left_arc2`` and ``right_arc2`` transitions
- ``transition_oracle`` (default dynamic/static_lazy_static whichever first is applicable): which transition oracle to use for the chosen ``transition_system``:
  - ``transition_system=projective``: available oracles are ``static`` and ``dynamic`` (``dynamic`` usually gives better results, but training time is slower)
  - ``transition_system=swap``: available oracles are ``static_eager`` and ``static_lazy`` (``static_lazy`` almost always gives better results)
  - ``transition_system=link2``: only available oracle is ``static``
- ``structured_interval`` (default 8): use search-based oracle in addition to the ``translation_oracle`` specified. This almost always gives better results, but makes training 2-3 times slower. For details, see the paper //Straka et al. 2015: Parsing Universal Dependency Treebanks using Neural Networks and Search-Based Oracle//
- ``single_root`` (default 1): allow only single root when parsing, and make sure only the root node has the ``root`` deprel (note that training data are checked to be in this format)
-

The Lemmas/UPOS/XPOS/FEATS used by the parser are configured by:
- ``use_gold_tags`` (default 0): if false and a tagger exists, the
  Lemmas/UPOS/XPOS/FEATS for both the training and heldout data are generated
  by the tagger, otherwise they are taken from the gold data
-

The embeddings used by the parser can be specified as follows:
- ``embedding_upostag`` (default 20): the dimension of the UPos embedding used in the parser
- ``embedding_feats`` (default 20): the dimension of the Feats embedding used in the parser
- ``embedding_xpostag`` (default 0): the dimension of the XPos embedding used in the parser
- ``embedding_form`` (default 50): the dimension of the Form embedding used in the parser
- ``embedding_lemma`` (default 0): the dimension of the Lemma embedding used in the parser
- ``embedding_deprel`` (default 20): the dimension of the Deprel embedding used in the parser
- ``embedding_form_file``: pre-trained word embeddings in ``word2vec`` textual format
- ``embedding_lemma_file``: pre-trained lemma embeddings in ``word2vec`` textual format
- ``embedding_form_mincount`` (default 2): for forms not present in the pre-trained embeddings,
  generate random embeddings if the form appears at least this number of times in the
  trainig data (forms not present in the pre-trained embeddings and appearing less number
  of times are considered OOV)
- ``embedding_lemma_mincount`` (default 2): for lemmas not present in the pre-trained embeddings,
  generate random embeddings if the lemma appears at least this number of times in the
  trainig data (lemmas not present in the pre-trained embeddings and appearing less number
  of times are considered OOV)
-

The neural-network training options:
- ``iterations`` (default 10): number of training iterations to use
- ``hidden_layer`` (default 200): the size of the hidden layer
- ``batch_size`` (default 10): batch size used during neural-network training
- ``learning_rate`` (default 0.02): the learning rate used during neural-network training
- ``learning_rate_final`` (0.001): the final learning rate used during neural-network training
- ``l2`` (0.5): the L2 regularization used during neural-network training
- ``early_stopping`` (default 1 if heldout is given, 0 otherwise): perform
    early stopping, choosing training iteration maximizing LAS on heldout data
-

During random hyperparameter search, ``structured_interval`` is chosen uniformly from
//{0,8,10}//, ``learning_rate`` is chosen logarithmically from ``<0.005,0.04)`` and
``l2`` is chosen uniformly from ``<0.2,0.6)``.

==== Pre-trained Word Embeddings ====[udpipe_training_parser_embeddings]

The pre-trained word embeddings for forms and lemmas can be specified in the
``word2vec`` textual format using the ``embedding_form_file`` and
``embedding_lemma_file`` options.

Note that pre-training word embeddings even on the UD data itself improves the
accuracy (we use ``word2vec`` with
``-cbow 0 -size 50 -window 10 -negative 5 -hs 0 -sample 1e-1 -threads 12 -binary 0 -iter 15 -min-count 2``
options to pre-train on the UD data after converting it to the horizontal format using
``udpipe --output=horizontal``).

Forms and lemmas can contain spaces in CoNLL-U v2, so these spaces are
converted to a Unicode character 'NO-BREAK SPACE' (U+00A0) before performing the
embedding lookup, because spaces are usually used to delimit tokens in word
embedding generating software (both ``word2vec`` and ``glove`` use spaces to
separate words on input and on output). When using UDPipe to generate
plain texts from CoNLL-U format using ``--output=horizontal``, this space
replacing happens automatically.

When looking up an embedding for a given word, the following possibilities are
tried in the following order until a match is found (or an embedding for unknown word is returned):
- original word
- all but the first character lowercased
- all characters lowercased
- if the word contains only digits, just the first digit is tried
-


=== Measuring Model Accuracy ===[udpipe_accuracy]

Measuring custom model accuracy can be performed by running:
``` udpipe --accuracy [udpipe_options] udpipe_model file ...

The command syntax is similar to the regular UDPipe operation, only
the input must be always in the [CoNLL-U format http://universaldependencies.org/docs/format.html]
and the ``--input`` and ``--output`` options are ignored.

Three different settings (depending on ``--tokenize(r)``, ``--tag(ger)`` and ``--parse(r)``)
can be evaluated:
- ``--tokenize(r) [--tag(ger) [--parse(r)]]``: Tokenizer is used to segment
  and tokenize plain text (obtained by ``SpaceAfter=No`` features and ``# newdoc``
  and ``# newpar`` comments in the input file). Optionally, a tagger is used on the
  resulting data to obtain Lemma/UPOS/XPOS/Feats columns and eventually a parser
  can be used to parse the results.

  The tokenizer is evaluated using F1-score on tokens, multi-word tokens, sentences
  and words. The words are aligned using a word-alignment algorithm
  described in the [CoNLL 2017 Shared Task in UD Parsing http://universaldependencies.org/conll17].
  The tagger and parser are evaluated on aligned
  words, resulting in F1 scores of Lemmas/UPOS/XPOS/Feats/UAS/LAS.

- ``--tag(ger) [--parse(r)]``: The gold segmented and tokenized input
  is tagged (and then optionally parsed using the tagger outputs)
  and then evaluated.

- ``--parse(r)``: The gold segmented and tokenized input is parsed using
  gold morphology (Lemmas/UPOS/XPOS/Feats) and evaluated.

-
